‎On July 24, 1958,
‎I got baptized;
and on November 5, 1958,
‎I already got arrested
for refusal to do military service.
‎The second time I was convicted was again
‎for refusal to do military service.
‎The next court trial took place in 1963.
‎I got seven years
​—⁠and five years exile.
‎They added three years
‎that I did not serve
for refusal to go to the army.
‎I was taken to Mordovia.
‎This was the first camp
where all believers were put,
‎amongst them 360 of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
‎The detentions were very strict
‎because around this time the governments
‎and party politics changed.
‎They decided that prisoners must suffer hunger.
‎The food rations were cut.
‎This was very difficult, very difficult, I must say.
‎And the winters can be cold.
‎Even in March, it could get as cold
‎as 35 degrees Celsius
​—⁠minus 35 (-31°F).
‎Spiritual things were for all of us
‎​—⁠the brothers in this camp​—
⁠top priority.
‎First of all, all 360 people
‎were divided into four congregations,
‎and every congregation was divided into groups.
‎Every congregation
had responsible brothers as overseers
‎and so had every group.
‎We conducted the study not just once a week,
‎but we conducted the study every day,
‎every day.
‎And brothers took this very seriously.
‎We had no time for any worldly thoughts.
‎Every Saturday and Sunday,
‎we had a very powerful choir​
—⁠men’s voices.
‎When we were singing,
we stationed guards
‎near the oversight house
where supervisors were on duty.
‎And if one of them came out,
it was signaled
‎from one brother to the next
so that if he or they came closer,
‎we would already be gone.
‎But the most interesting thing
‎was that we were singing in the zone.
‎We were the prisoners,
‎but our listeners were outside.
‎They were sitting up in the trees
‎​—⁠the children of the supervisors,
‎officers, and guards.
‎And they were listening to our choir.
‎All together during that time,
‎I was in seven prison camps.
‎I spent about 13 years there
‎and another 5 years in exile in Siberia.
‎But when I was convicted the last time,
‎the head of the interrogation department
came into my cell and said,
‎“Viktor, when you finish all your prison terms,
‎you will have nothing at all​
—⁠no family, no children.”
‎I smiled at him and asked:
‎“How do you know this,
Citizen Lieutenant Colonel?
‎I don’t know it either,
but I do trust in Jehovah.”
‎Today, I do have a family
‎and do have my wife and my children.
‎We continue to serve Jehovah.
‎And my greatest joy
‎is when my six-year-old granddaughter
‎stands next to me in the Kingdom Hall
‎and sings songs that praise Jehovah.
‎Well, to make it simple,
I would put it this way:
‎Preserve your love
for Jehovah and for your brothers.
‎Joy in Jehovah’s service
​—⁠never lose it!
‎We will not fear anything bad
‎​—⁠neither cold nor hunger​—⁠
‎nothing.